Add payment testing guide. (#857)
OWASP/wstg: document/4-Web_Application_Security_Testing/10-Business_Logic_Testing/10-Test-Payment-Functionality.md

### Price Tampering

#### On the Application

- Editing HTML forms/intercepting on application

#### On the Payment Gateway

- Editing HTML or intercepting on transfer to payment gateway
- Negative transactions may be processed as a refund

#### Secure Hashes

- Some payment gateways use secure hashes to prevent tampering
- Check that secure hash is actually enforced - try removing it
- Can be based on public/private key crypto (such as [PayPal](https://developer.paypal.com/api/nvp-soap/paypal-payments-standard/integration-guide/encryptedwebpayments/#link-usingewptoprotectmanuallycreatedpaymentbuttons))
    - Try using public key from certificate
- Can be bashed on a secret key (such as Adyen, which uses [HMAC-SHA256](https://docs.adyen.com/online-payments/classic-integrations/hosted-payment-pages/hmac-signature-calculation))
    - Try and guess or brute-force

#### Currency Tampering

- If you can't tamper price, can you change the currency (pay $10 when it should be £10)

#### Time Delayed Requests

- If the value of an item changes (such as on a currency exchange), can you "freeze" a request and pay with old value?

### Discount Codes

> - Can you guess (TEST, SORRY, SORRY10, etc) or brute-force discount codes?

Reviewer: Examples from hotel internet walled gardens:
- Disclosed in JS "constants".
- Disclosed in HTML comments.

- Can you use wildcards (`%`, `*`)?

> - Can you apply multiple discount codes?

Reviewer: Not "discount" or "coupon" but can be mentioned here somewhere.

I did an assessment of a municipality's dog licensing portal, of course you had to pay (and couldn't pay negative amount or qty), but you could also "donate" to something like the SPCA and your "donation" could be negative. You couldn't get a "refund" but you could bring your total owing down to $0.01.

    - Usually fixed fee + percentage
- Very small transaction ($0.01) usually cost merchant money to receive
- Check minimum transaction values

### Testing Logistics

- If testing in live, may result in real transactions
- Get client to cancel and refund (processing fees?)
- If testing in dev/staging, get test payment cards
- Keep careful track of any transactions made

### PCI DSS

- Standard that covers card payments
- Any application taking payments should be compliant
- Requirements depend on how payments are made (see [Visa Guidance](https://www.visa.co.uk/dam/VCOM/regional/ve/unitedkingdom/PDF/risk/processing-e-commerce-payments-guide-73-17337.pdf)):
    - SAQ A: redirect or IFRAME
    - SAQ A-EP: cross-domain POST
    - SAQ D: cardholder data touches server
- SAQ A is best choice, should flag clients not doing that
- Flag if cardholder data is stored and can be viewed/retrieved

### Test Payment Cards

- Most payment gateways have test cards - can these be used?
    - [Adyen](https://docs.adyen.com/development-resources/test-cards/test-card-numbers)
    - [Globalpay](https://developer.globalpay.com/resources/test-card-numbers)

>     - [Stripe](https://stripe.com/docs/testing)

Reviewer: Nice!

I had mentioned this one in slack at one point.

# Test Payment Functionality

|ID          |
|------------|
|WSTG-BUSL-10|

## Summary

> Many applications implement payment functionality, including e-commerce sites, subscriptions, donations and currency exchanges. The security of this functionality is critical, as vulnerabilities could allow attackers to steal from the website, make fraudulent purchases, or even to steal payment card details from other users. These issue could result in not such reputational damage to the organisation, but also significant financial losses, both from direct losses and fines from industry regulators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many applications implement payment functionality, including e-commerce sites, subscriptions, charities/donations, and currency exchanges. The security of this functionality is critical, as vulnerabilities could allow attackers to steal from the business, make fraudulent purchases, or even to steal payment card details from other users. These issue could result in not only reputational damage to the organization, but also significant financial losses, both from direct losses and fines from industry regulators.
```

## Test Objectives

- Determine whether the business logic for the e-commerce functionality is robust.
- Understand how the payment functionality works.
- Determine whether the payment functionality is secure.

## How to Test

### Payment Gateway Integration Methods

There are several different ways that applications can integrate payment functionality, and the testing approach will vary depending on which one is used. The most common methods are:

- Redirecting the user to a third-party payment gateway.
- Loading a third-party payment gateway in an IFRAME on the application.
- Having a HTML form that makes a cross-domain POST request to a third-party payment gateway.
- Accepting the card details directly, and then making a POST from the application backend to the payment gateway's API.

### PCI DSS

> The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a standard that organisations are required to follow in order process debit and card payments (although it's important to note that it is not a law). A full discussion of this standard is outside of the scope of this guide (and of most penetration tests) - but it's useful for testers to understand a few key points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a standard that organizations are required to follow in order process debit and card payments (although it's important to note that it is not a law). A full discussion of this standard is outside of the scope of this guide (and of most penetration tests) - but it's useful for testers to understand a few key points.
```

The most common misconception about PCI DSS is that it only applies to systems that store cardholder data (i.e, debit or credit card details). This is incorrect: it applies to any system that "stores, processes or transmits" this information. Exactly which requirements need to be followed depends on how which of the payment gateway integration methods are used. The [Visa Processing E-Commerce Payments guidance](https://www.visa.co.uk/dam/VCOM/regional/ve/unitedkingdom/PDF/risk/processing-e-commerce-payments-guide-73-17337.pdf) provides further details on this, but as a brief summary:

| Integration Method | Self Assessment Questionnaire (SAQ) |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------|
| Redirect | [SAQ A](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/documents/PCI-DSS-v3_2_1-SAQ-A.pdf) |
| IFRAME | [SAQ A](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/documents/PCI-DSS-v3_2_1-SAQ-A.pdf) |
| Cross-domain POST | [SAQ A-EP](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/documents/PCI-DSS-v3_2-SAQ-A_EP-rev1_1.pdf) |
| Backend API | [SAQ D](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/documents/PCI-DSS-v3_2_1-SAQ-D_Merchant.pdf) |

> As well as the differences in the attack surface and risk profile of each approach, there is also a significant different in the number of requirements between SAQ A (22 requirements) and SAQ D (329 requirements) that the organisation needs to meet. As such, it's worth highlighting applications that are not using an redirect or IFRAME, as they are represent increased technical and compliance risks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As well as the differences in the attack surface and risk profile of each approach, there is also a significant difference in the number of requirements between SAQ A (22 requirements) and SAQ D (329 requirements) that the organization needs to meet. As such, it's worth highlighting applications that are not using an redirect or IFRAME, as they are represent increased technical and compliance risks.
```

### Quantity Tampering

> Most e-commerce websites allow users to add items to a basket before they start the checkout process. This basket should keep track of which items that have been added, and the quantity of each item. The quantity should normally be a positive integer, but if the website does not properly validate this then it may be possible to a decimal quantity of an item (such as `0.1`) or a negative quantity (such as `-1`). Depending on the backend processing, adding negative quantities of an item may result in a negative value, reducing the overall cost of the basket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most e-commerce websites allow users to add items to a basket before they start the checkout process. This basket should keep track of which items that have been added, and the quantity of each item. The quantity should normally be a positive integer, but if the website does not properly validate this then it may be possible to include a decimal quantity of an item (such as `0.1`), or a negative quantity (such as `-1`). Depending on the backend processing, adding negative quantities of an item may result in a negative value, reducing the overall cost of the basket.
```

> There are usually multiple ways to modify the contents, of the basket that should be tested, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are usually multiple ways to modify the contents of the basket that should be tested, such as:
```

### Price Tampering

#### On the Application

When adding an item to the basket, the application should only include the item and a quantity, such as the example request below:

```http
POST /api/basket/add HTTP/1.1
Host: example.org

item_id=1&quantity=5
```

However, in some cases the application may also include the price, meaning that it may be possible to tamper it:

```http
POST /api/basket/add HTTP/1.1
Host: example.org

item_id=1&quantity=5&price=2.00
```

Different types of items may have different validation rules, so each type needs to be separately tested. Some applications also allow users to add an optional donation to charity as part of their purchase, and this donation can usually be an arbitrary amount. If this amount is not validated, it may be possible to add a negative donation amount, which would then reduce the total value of the basket.

#### On the Payment Gateway

If the checkout process is performed on an third-party payment gateway, then it may be possible to tamper with the prices between the application and the gateway.

> For example, the transfer to the gateway may be performed using a cross-domain POST to the gateway, as shown in the HTML example below (note that the card details are not included - the user will be prompted for them on the payment gateway):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transfer to the gateway may be performed using a cross-domain POST to the gateway, as shown in the HTML example below:

> Note: that the card details are not included - the user will be prompted for them on the payment gateway.
```

Author: This isn't a quote, so it looks odd to add it in the quote markdown. Is this common elsewhere in the WSTG?

Reviewer: It's how we've done notes elsewhere.

Author: Fair enough.

```html
<form action="https://example.org/process_payment" method="POST">
    <input type="hidden" id="merchant_id" value="123" />
    <input type="hidden" id="basket_id" value="456" />
    <input type="hidden" id="item_id" value="1" />
    <input type="hidden" id="item_quantity" value="5" />
    <input type="hidden" id="item_total" value="20.00" />
    <input type="hidden" id="shipping_total" value="2.00" />
    <input type="hidden" id="basket_total" value="22.00" />
    <input type="hidden" id="currency" value="GBP" />
    <input type="submit" id="submit" value="submit" />
</form>
```

> By modifying the HTML form or intercepting the POST request, it may be possible to modify the prices of items, and to effectively purchase them for less. Note that many payment gateway will reject a transaction with a value of zero, to a total of 0.01 is more likely to succeed. However, some payment gateways may accept negative values (used to process refunds). Where there are multiple values (such as item prices, a shipping cost and the total basket cost), all of these should be tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By modifying the HTML form or intercepting the POST request, it may be possible to modify the prices of items, and to effectively purchase them for less. Note that many payment gateways will reject a transaction with a value of zero, so a total of 0.01 is more likely to succeed. However, some payment gateways may accept negative values (used to process refunds). Where there are multiple values (such as item prices, a shipping cost, and the total basket cost), all of these should be tested.
```

If the payment gateway uses an IFRAME instead, it may be possible to perform a similar type of attack by modifying the IFRAME URL:

```html
<iframe src="https://example.org/payment_iframe?merchant_id=123&basket_total=22.00" />
```

> Note that the payment gateway is usually run by a third-party, and as such may not be included in the scope of testing. This means that while price tampering may be acceptable, other types of attacks (such as SQL injection) should not be performed without explicit written approval).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: that the payment gateway is usually run by a third-party, and as such may not be included in the scope of testing. This means that while price tampering may be acceptable, other types of attacks (such as SQL injection) should not be performed without explicit written approval).
```

Author: As with previous, this isn't a quote, so this markdown doesn't seem correct?

Reviewer: It's right, it's how we've been doing notes.

#### Encrypted Transaction Details

In order to prevent the transaction being tampered with, some payment gateways will encrypt the details of the request that is made to them. For example, [Paypal](https://developer.paypal.com/api/nvp-soap/paypal-payments-standard/integration-guide/encryptedwebpayments/#link-usingewptoprotectmanuallycreatedpaymentbuttons) do this using public key cryptography.

The first thing to try is making an unencrypted request, as some payment gateways allow insecure transactions unless they have been specifically configured to reject them.

If this doesn't work, then you need to find the public key that is used to encrypt the transaction details, which could be exposed in a backup of the application, or if you can find a directory traversal vulnerability.

> Alternatively, it's possible that the application re-uses the same public/private key pair for the payment gateway and it's digital certificate. You can obtain the public key from the server with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, it's possible that the application re-uses the same public/private key pair for the payment gateway and its digital certificate. You can obtain the public key from the server with the following command:
```

```bash
echo -e '\0' | openssl s_client -connect example.org:443 2>/dev/null | openssl x509 -pubkey -noout
```

Once you have this key, you can then try and create an encrypted request (based on the payment gateway's documentation), and submit it to the gateway to see if it's accepted.

#### Secure Hashes

> Other payment gateway use a secure hash (or a HMAC) of the transaction details to prevent tampering. The exact details of how this is done will vary between providers (for example, [Adyen](https://docs.adyen.com/online-payments/classic-integrations/hosted-payment-pages/hmac-signature-calculation) use HMAC-SHA256), but it will normally include the details of the transaction and a secret value. For example, a hash may be calculated as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other payment gateways use a secure hash (or a HMAC) of the transaction details to prevent tampering. The exact details of how this is done will vary between providers (for example, [Adyen](https://docs.adyen.com/online-payments/classic-integrations/hosted-payment-pages/hmac-signature-calculation) use HMAC-SHA256), but it will normally include the details of the transaction and a secret value. For example, a hash may be calculated as:
```

#### Time Delayed Requests

If the value of items on the site changes over time (for example on a currency exchange), then it may be possible to buy or sell at an old price by intercepting requests using a local proxy and delaying them. In order for this to be exploitable, the price would need to either be included in the request, or linked to something in the request (such as session or transaction ID). The example below shows how this could potentially be exploited on a application that allows users to buy and sell gold:

- View the current price of gold on the website.
- Initiate a buy request for 1oz of gold.
- Intercept and freeze the request.
- Wait one minutes to check the price of gold again:
    - If it increases, allow the transaction to complete, and buy the gold for less than it's current value.
    - If it decreases, drop the request request.

> If the website allows the user to make payments using cryptocurrencies (which are usually far more volatile than FIAT currencies), it may be possible to exploit this by obtaining a fixed price in that cryptocurrency, and then waiting to see if the value rises or falls compared to the relevant FIAT currency.

Reviewer: Okay you can call me n00b but I had to lookup FIAT currency. You should probably spell it out or use another term. (Government backed? Traditional?)

Author: Some people get very upset about terms like "government backed" currencies. I've rephrased the sentence a bit to avoid the problem.

### Discount Codes

If the application supports discount codes, then there are various checks that should be carried out:

> - Are the codes easily guessable (TEST, TEST10, SORRY, SORRY10, company name, etc)?

Reviewer: How about if they're somehow parsed/processed?

Ex the retailer (or whatever) advertises BLACKFRIDAY10 for 10% off but also accepts BLACKFRIDAY50 as 50% off :wink: because they're actually stupidly parsing the # in the coupon code.

Author: Added a point with this.

- Is there any brute-force protection?
- Can multiple discount codes be applied at once?
- Can discount codes be applied multiple times?
- Can you [inject wildcard characters](../07-Input_Validation_Testing/05-Testing_for_SQL_Injection.md#sql-wildcard-injection) such as `%` or `*`?

> - Are discount codes exposed in the HTML source, in or hidden `<input>` fields anywhere on the application?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Are discount codes exposed in the HTML source, or hidden `<input>` fields anywhere on the application?
```

In addition to these, the usual vulnerabilities such as SQL injection should be tested for.

### Breaking Payment Flows

> If the checkout or payment process on an application involves multiple stages (such as adding items to a basket, entering discount codes, entering shipping details and entering billing information), then it may be possible to cause unintended behaviour by performing these steps outside of the expected sequence. For example, you could try:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the checkout or payment process on an application involves multiple stages (such as adding items to a basket, entering discount codes, entering shipping details, and entering billing information), then it may be possible to cause unintended behaviour by performing these steps outside of the expected sequence. For example, you could try:
```

- Modifying the shipping address after the billing details have been entered to reduce shipping costs.
- Removing items after entering shipping details, to avoid a minimum basket value.
- Modifying the contents of the basket after applying a discount code.

> - Modifying the contents of a basket after completing the checkout process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Modifying the contents of a basket after completing the checkout process.
```

- Keeping a record of any orders that are made so that they can be cancelled and refunded.
- Not placing orders that can't be cancelled, or that will cause other actions (such as goods being immediately dispatched from a warehouse).

## Related Test Cases

- [Testing for SQL Injection](../07-Input_Validation_Testing/05-Testing_for_SQL_Injection.md)
- [Testing for the Circumvention of Work Flows](06-Testing_for_the_Circumvention_of_Work_Flows.md)

## Remediation

- Avoid storing, transmitting or processing card details wherever possible.
    - Use a redirect or IFRAME for the payment gateway.
- Review payment gateway documentation and use all available security features (such as encryption and secure hashes).
- Handle all pricing related information on server-side:
    - The only things included in client-side requests should be item IDs and quantities.
- Implement appropriate input validation and business logic constraints (such as checking for negative item numbers or values).
- Ensure that application payment flow is robust and that steps can't be performed out of sequence.

## Tools

> - Intercepting proxy

Reviewer: Drop this?
I kinda feel like dev tools or intercepting proxy go without saying.....I dunno.

Author: It was in the template, but I don't think it adds anything. Removed.

    - If it decreases, drop the request request.

If the website allows the user to make payments using cryptocurrencies (which are usually far more volatile), it may be possible to exploit this by obtaining a fixed price in that cryptocurrency, and then waiting to see if the value rises or falls compared to the main currency used by the website.

### Discount Codes

If the application supports discount codes, then there are various checks that should be carried out:

- Are the codes easily guessable (TEST, TEST10, SORRY, SORRY10, company name, etc)?
    - If a code has a number in, can more codes be found by increasing the number?
- Is there any brute-force protection?
- Can multiple discount codes be applied at once?
- Can discount codes be applied multiple times?
- Can you [inject wildcard characters](../07-Input_Validation_Testing/05-Testing_for_SQL_Injection.md#sql-wildcard-injection) such as `%` or `*`?
- Are discount codes exposed in the HTML source or hidden `<input>` fields anywhere on the application?

In addition to these, the usual vulnerabilities such as SQL injection should be tested for.

### Breaking Payment Flows

> If the checkout or payment process on an application involves multiple stages (such as adding items to a basket, entering discount codes, entering shipping details, and entering billing information), then it may be possible to cause unintended behaviour by performing these steps outside of the expected sequence. For example, you could try:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the checkout or payment process on an application involves multiple stages (such as adding items to a basket, entering discount codes, entering shipping details, and entering billing information), then it may be possible to cause unintended behavior by performing these steps outside of the expected sequence. For example, you could try:
```
